SUPPLY & DEMAND

TRADING STRATEGY

─────────────────────────────────────────

A Comprehensive Research Document

Complete Coverage: All Markets · All Timeframes · Algorithmic Framework

Markets Covered:

Forex  ·  Stocks  ·  Crypto  ·  Commodities  ·  Indices  ·  Futures

Prepared by: Quantitative Trading Research

Date: May 25, 2026

1. Introduction to Supply & Demand Trading

Supply and Demand (S&D) trading is one of the most powerful and institutionally-grounded methodologies in financial markets. Unlike conventional support/resistance trading, S&D theory is rooted in the fundamental economic forces that actually drive price movement — the imbalance between buying (demand) and selling (supply) pressure created by large institutional participants.

At its core, Supply and Demand trading is the art of identifying price zones where significant institutional orders were previously placed, and anticipating that those same institutions — central banks, hedge funds, commercial banks, and market makers — will return to those zones to fill remaining orders. When they do, price reacts explosively, creating high-probability trading opportunities for retail traders who have correctly mapped these zones.

Why S&D Works — The Institutional Logic

• Institutions cannot fill massive orders at a single price — they need time (consolidation/base) to accumulate or distribute

• When price leaves a zone quickly, unfilled orders remain pending at that level

• When price returns, those pending orders are triggered, causing the same reaction

• This creates a self-fulfilling, repeating pattern on every timeframe and every market

• The stronger the initial departure from a zone, the more orders remain, and the stronger the reaction on return

1.1 Historical Context

The Supply and Demand methodology was popularized by Sam Seiden, a former floor trader at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), who observed that price movement was not random — it was driven by the placement and execution of large institutional orders. His observations led to the codification of supply and demand zones as distinct trading instruments, separating them from traditional technical analysis patterns.

Over the years, institutions such as the Inner Circle Trader (ICT), Eightify, and several prop trading firms have refined the methodology into increasingly precise algorithmic frameworks, incorporating concepts such as liquidity grabs, Fair Value Gaps (FVGs), Order Blocks, and Breaker Blocks — all of which are extensions of the original S&D theory.

1.2 Core Principles

Price moves from one zone of imbalance to another

Zones are created by rapid price departure from a base (consolidation)

Fresh (untested) zones are significantly more powerful than tested ones

Higher timeframe zones take precedence over lower timeframe zones

The strength of a zone is measured by the speed and size of the departure candle

Supply and Demand is fractal — the same patterns appear on all timeframes

Price seeks liquidity before reversing at major zones

Figure 1: Anatomy of Supply & Demand Zones — Proximal and Distal Lines

2. Zone Types & Formation Patterns

Supply and Demand zones are classified by the price action pattern that formed them. There are four primary formation types, each indicating a specific institutional behavior. Understanding how zones form is the foundation of the entire strategy.

2.1 The Four Primary Zone Formations

2.1.1 Rally-Base-Drop (RBD) — Supply Zone

A Rally-Base-Drop formation identifies a Supply zone. Price rallies up (institutions distribute/sell to retail buyers), consolidates in a tight base (institutions continue loading short positions), then drops sharply away from the zone. The base represents where the institutional sell orders were placed. When price returns to this area, the remaining sell orders trigger, causing another drop.

2.1.2 Drop-Base-Rally (DBR) — Demand Zone

The mirror of RBD. Price drops down, consolidates in a base, then rallies strongly. Institutions were accumulating buy positions in the base. This is the most common and cleanest demand formation. The sharp rally departure indicates massive unfilled buy orders remaining in the zone.

2.1.3 Rally-Base-Rally (RBR) — Continuation Demand

Price rallies, consolidates briefly (minor pullback), then continues rallying. This is a continuation demand zone within an uptrend. Institutions used the base to add to existing long positions. These zones are slightly weaker than fresh DBR zones but occur more frequently in strong trends.

2.1.4 Drop-Base-Drop (DBD) — Continuation Supply

The mirror of RBR. Price drops, consolidates, then continues dropping. Institutions added to short positions in the base. These are continuation supply zones within a downtrend. Tradeable when HTF trend is confirmed bearish.

Figure 2: The Three Primary Zone Formation Types with Visual Pattern Examples

2.2 Zone Components

Zone Component

Definition & Importance

Proximal Line

The closest edge of the zone to current price. This is where price enters the zone. Entry triggers are placed here.

Distal Line

The far edge of the zone, furthest from current price. Stop losses are placed just beyond this level.

Zone Width

The distance between proximal and distal lines. Tighter zones (small base) indicate faster institutional decisioning = stronger zones.

Base Candles

The consolidation candles within the zone. Fewer, smaller candles = more concentrated orders = stronger zone.

Departure Candle

The large candle that exits the zone. Larger body = more institutional intent = stronger zone.

Mitigation Level

The 50% midpoint of the zone. Price often reacts strongly here as a partial mitigation.

2.3 Zone Quality Criteria

Not all zones are created equal. A strict quality filter must be applied before trading any zone. The following criteria determine zone strength:

Freshness: Has the zone been tested before? Fresh (first touch) zones are significantly stronger.

Departure Speed: How many candles did it take to leave the zone? Fewer = stronger (ideally 1-2 candles).

Base Size: How many candles formed the base? Fewer = stronger (1-4 candles ideal).

HTF Alignment: Does the zone align with a higher timeframe zone? Confluence = stronger signal.

Risk-to-Reward: Is there clear space for the trade to develop? Minimum 1:2 RR required.

Departure Candle Size: Large bodied candle with minimal wicks = institutional conviction.

Pattern Quality: Clean RBD, DBR, RBR, or DBD pattern with no overlapping candles in base.

Figure 3: Zone Strength Scoring System — Minimum threshold score of 7/10 required

3. Algorithmic Framework — Inputs, Logic & Outputs

The Supply and Demand strategy can be fully systematized into a rules-based algorithm. Below is the complete specification — from data inputs to trade execution outputs — suitable for both manual execution and automated system development.

Algorithm Overview

Name: Supply & Demand Zone Trading System (SDZT)

Type: Mean-reversion + Trend-following hybrid

Execution: Top-down multi-timeframe analysis

Markets: All liquid financial markets (Forex, Stocks, Crypto, Commodities, Indices)

Timeframes: Monthly → 1 Minute (fractal application)

Risk model: Fixed percentage risk per trade (default 1%)

3.1 System Inputs

Required Data Inputs

Input

Type

Source

Description

OHLCV Data

Time-series

Broker/Exchange feed

Open, High, Low, Close, Volume for all required timeframes

HTF Trend

Categorical

Calculated from price

Bullish / Bearish / Ranging — from Daily/Weekly chart

Zone List

Spatial array

Algorithm output

Array of [proximal, distal, type, freshness, score] for all TFs

Current Price

Float

Live market feed

Real-time bid/ask price used for proximity calculations

ATR (14)

Float

Calculated

Average True Range — used for dynamic SL and zone width filtering

Session

Categorical

Time-based

London / New York / Asian — affects zone weighting and timing

Volatility State

Float

VIX or ATR ratio

High/Normal/Low volatility — adjusts position sizing

Account Balance

Float

Broker API

Current available capital for position sizing calculations

3.2 Zone Detection Logic

The core algorithm scans price history to detect and classify supply and demand zones. The logic operates as follows:

Zone Detection Pseudocode

FOR each candle C in price_history:

   IF candle[C] is a "base" candle (body < 40% of ATR):

      Look forward: IF next 1-3 candles depart > 2x ATR in one direction:

         Look backward: What preceded the base?

            IF price was rallying → base → drop: MARK as Supply Zone (RBD)

            IF price was dropping → base → rally: MARK as Demand Zone (DBR)

            IF price was rallying → base → rally: MARK as Demand Zone (RBR)

            IF price was dropping → base → drop: MARK as Supply Zone (DBD)

      CALCULATE: proximal = closest edge, distal = far edge

      CALCULATE: zone_score = freshness + departure_speed + base_size + htf_alignment

      IF zone_score >= 7: ADD to active_zones_list

      IF zone_score < 7: DISCARD zone

3.3 Trade Entry Logic

Condition

Bullish (Demand)

Bearish (Supply)

Both

HTF Trend

Bullish (Daily/Weekly)

Bearish (Daily/Weekly)

Always check HTF first

Zone Type

DBR or RBR

RBD or DBD

Must match formation pattern

Zone Score

>= 7/10

>= 7/10

Apply scoring rubric

Price Location

At/in demand zone

At/in supply zone

Within proximal line

Entry Trigger (Aggressive)

Touch of proximal line

Touch of proximal line

Immediate market/limit order

Entry Trigger (Conservative)

Bullish engulfing/pin bar

Bearish engulfing/pin bar

Wait for LTF confirmation candle

Volume Confirmation

Volume spike on entry

Volume spike on entry

Optional but increases conviction

Session Filter

London/NY open preferred

London/NY open preferred

Avoid low-volume Asian session entries

3.4 Stop Loss & Take Profit Outputs

Parameter

Rule & Calculation

Stop Loss (SL)

Place 2-5 pips / ticks BEYOND the distal line of the zone. Never inside the zone.

SL Formula

SL = Distal_Line ± (ATR × 0.1) — adds buffer for spread and slippage

Take Profit 1 (TP1)

First significant opposing zone (supply for longs, demand for shorts)

Take Profit 2 (TP2)

Second opposing zone or major structural level — book remaining position

Trailing Stop

Trail behind each new base/zone formed during the move (manual trailing)

Partial Exit Rule

Close 50% at TP1, trail remaining 50% to TP2 and beyond

Break-Even Rule

Move SL to entry after price moves 1R (1× risk distance) in your favor

Max SL Width

Maximum SL = 2× ATR(14). If zone is wider, skip the trade.

Figure 4: Complete Supply & Demand Trading Algorithm — Decision Flowchart

4. Timeframe Application — All Timeframes

Supply and Demand is a fractal strategy, meaning the exact same patterns and rules apply on every timeframe. The key principle is top-down analysis: always start from the highest timeframe to determine the macro bias and primary zones, then drill down progressively to lower timeframes to pinpoint precise entries.

Figure 5: Timeframe Hierarchy — Top-Down Supply & Demand Analysis Flow

4.1 The Top-Down Analysis Process

The top-down approach is non-negotiable in S&D trading. You do not look at lower timeframes in isolation — they must always be viewed in the context of higher timeframe zones and trend. This prevents trading against the dominant institutional flow.

Timeframe

Role

What to Do

Zone Strength

Monthly (MN)

Macro bias & major zones

Identify primary trend direction; mark major S/D levels only

★★★★★ Strongest

Weekly (W1)

Swing setup & zone context

Confirm monthly bias; find high-quality weekly zones

★★★★☆ Very Strong

Daily (D1)

Primary trading timeframe

Main zone identification; determine trade direction

★★★★☆ Strong

4-Hour (H4)

Intraday direction

Refine daily zones; confirm intraday bias; find entry zone

★★★☆☆ Good

1-Hour (H1)

Entry zone trigger

Identify precise entry zone; look for LTF reaction

★★★☆☆ Moderate

15-Minute (M15)

Entry confirmation

Find confirmation candle pattern; set exact entry

★★☆☆☆ Lower

5-Minute (M5)

Precise execution

Fine-tune entry for best price; manage active trade

★★☆☆☆ Scalp

1-Minute (M1)

Ultra-precision scalping

Scalp entries only within confirmed HTF zone; tight SL

★☆☆☆☆ Noise risk

4.2 Timeframe-Specific Entry Frameworks

Monthly/Weekly — Position Trading

On the monthly and weekly timeframes, zones are massive — often spanning hundreds of pips or several percentage points. Position trades held for weeks to months. Risk per trade can be 0.5-1.5% given the longer holding period. These zones are created by central bank decisions, quarterly earnings, or macro economic shifts. Entries are typically executed on the daily or weekly close candle.

Daily/4H — Swing Trading (Primary Approach)

This is the bread and butter of S&D trading for most practitioners. Daily zones are formed by significant institutional activity — major news events, end-of-day position building, or economic data releases. The 4H chart is used to find the entry zone within the daily zone. Trades are held from several hours to several days. This timeframe offers the best balance of signal quality and frequency.

1H/15M — Day Trading

Intraday supply and demand zones on the 1H and 15M charts are highly reliable during peak market sessions (London and New York opens). These zones are created by session-specific institutional activity. Trades are entered and closed within the same trading day. The 15M is used for entry triggers after the 1H zone is identified. ATR-based stops are essential at these timeframes.

5M/1M — Scalping

Scalping S&D zones on the 5M and 1M timeframes requires the highest precision and the fastest execution. These zones form during specific intraday periods — typically the first 30-90 minutes of London or New York session. A scalper must have a confirmed HTF zone (at least 15M or 1H) before taking a scalp entry on the 1M/5M. Risk-to-reward must be minimum 1:1.5 given the noise at these levels.

Multi-Timeframe Rule — The 3-TF Alignment

For the highest probability trades, you want alignment across at least 3 timeframes:

  → HTF (e.g., Daily): Confirms trend direction and major zone

  → MTF (e.g., 4H): Confirms zone and entry setup

  → LTF (e.g., 15M): Provides precise entry trigger

When all 3 timeframes agree → HIGH CONVICTION TRADE. This is your A+ setup.

When only 2 agree → MODERATE quality. Reduce position size.

When only 1 agrees → DO NOT TRADE. Wait for confluence.

5. Market-Specific Application

Supply and Demand principles are universal — they apply to any liquid market where institutional participants operate. However, each market has unique characteristics that affect how zones form, how long they remain valid, and how they should be traded. This section covers the nuances of applying S&D across all major asset classes.

Figure 6: Supply & Demand Trading Across All Major Financial Markets

5.1 Forex Market

The Forex market is the largest and most liquid financial market in the world, with $7.5 trillion traded daily. It is the ideal market for S&D trading because institutional activity — central banks, commercial banks, hedge funds — is constant and creates clean, well-defined zones.

Forex S&D Characteristics

Details

Best Pairs for S&D

EUR/USD, GBP/USD, USD/JPY, AUD/USD, XAU/USD (Gold) — highest liquidity = cleanest zones

Session Timing

London Open (08:00-10:00 GMT) and NY Open (13:00-15:00 GMT) produce the strongest zone reactions

Zone Invalidation

A zone is invalidated when price closes THROUGH it (body close), not just wicks through it

News Events

High-impact news (NFP, CPI, FOMC) can destroy or massively strengthen existing zones

Spread Consideration

Add spread to SL calculation. On major pairs, spread is minimal (0.5-2 pips typical)

Key Confluences

S&D zone + round number (1.2000, 1.1500) + Fibonacci level = very high probability

5.2 Stock Market & Equities

The stock market creates supply and demand zones through a combination of earnings reports, analyst upgrades/downgrades, macro economic data, and institutional re-balancing. Individual stocks can have very explosive zone reactions due to the concentrated ownership by institutional funds.

Stock Market S&D Characteristics

Details

Best Instruments

Large-cap liquid stocks (AAPL, MSFT, NVDA, TSLA), ETFs (SPY, QQQ), Stock Index CFDs

Gap Trading

Overnight gaps often fill back to S&D zones. Fade the gap to the unfilled zone is a powerful setup.

Earnings Zones

Post-earnings candles create some of the most powerful supply or demand zones — institutional repositioning

Volume Profile

Combine S&D zones with volume profile (POC, VAH, VAL) for higher probability confirmation

Market Hours

US session 9:30-16:00 EST only. Pre/post market can form zones but execution is riskier (wide spreads)

Sector Rotation

When a sector rotates, entire sector zones align — trade in direction of institutional sector flow

5.3 Cryptocurrency Market

Crypto markets operate 24/7 with no central exchange, making S&D zones particularly powerful because unfilled orders can remain valid for extended periods. The extreme volatility of crypto means zones tend to be larger and more explosive when triggered.

Crypto S&D Characteristics

Details

Best Assets

BTC, ETH for cleanest zones. Large-cap altcoins (SOL, BNB, XRP) also work well.

24/7 Market

Zones form at any hour. Weekend gaps are common when traditional markets re-open.

Zone Size

Crypto zones are larger (0.5-3% of price). Adjust SL accordingly — use % not fixed pip values.

Liquidity Grabs

Crypto frequently produces "stop hunts" — price sweeps below a zone then rockets higher. Trade after the sweep.

Exchange Differences

Spot vs Futures charts may differ slightly. Always trade from the exchange with highest volume for that asset.

On-Chain Data

Whale wallet movements can confirm or invalidate zones — optional but powerful additional context.

5.4 Commodities

Commodities are the most literal embodiment of supply and demand — physical supply constraints, demand cycles, and geopolitical events create powerful zones. Gold (XAU/USD) is a particularly clean market for S&D trading.

Commodity S&D Characteristics

Details

Gold (XAU/USD)

The most popular commodity for S&D trading. Clean institutional zones. Strong reaction to USD strength/weakness.

Oil (WTI/Brent)

Heavily influenced by OPEC decisions. S&D zones align with production cut/increase announcements.

Silver (XAG/USD)

Follows Gold with more volatility. Same S&D rules apply. Larger percentage moves.

Agricultural

Seasonal patterns affect zone validity. Planting/harvest seasons create predictable S/D imbalances.

Zone Validity

Commodity zones can remain valid for months. HTF zones (Monthly/Weekly) are especially powerful.

Storage & Seasons

Physical supply/demand creates natural seasonal patterns that align with technical S&D zones.

5.5 Indices

Stock indices (SPX500, NAS100, DAX40, FTSE100, Nikkei225) are among the most powerful instruments for S&D trading because they represent the collective institutional activity across an entire market. Major central bank decisions and economic data directly create or destroy index zones.

Index S&D Characteristics

Details

Best Indices

S&P 500 (SPX), NASDAQ 100 (NAS100), Dow Jones (US30), DAX40, FTSE100

Macro Sensitivity

Fed rate decisions, GDP data, CPI reports create the strongest index zones

Correlation

Major indices correlate highly. S&D zone on SPX often aligns with NAS100 and US30.

ATH/ATL Zones

All-time highs create fresh supply zones with no overhead resistance. ATLs create demand.

Gamma Exposure

Options market maker hedging (GEX) often aligns with S&D zones — powerful confirmation.

Session Open Gaps

Index futures gaps (Sunday open vs Friday close) often fill to the nearest S&D zone.

6. Entry Models & Trade Execution

There are two primary entry models in Supply and Demand trading: the Aggressive (limit order) entry and the Conservative (confirmation) entry. Each has advantages and trade-offs in terms of risk, fill rate, and reward potential.

Figure 7: Model 1 (Aggressive Limit Entry) vs Model 2 (Conservative Confirmation Entry)

6.1 Model 1 — Aggressive Entry (Limit Order at Zone)

The aggressive entry places a limit order at the proximal line of the zone before price arrives. This gets the best possible entry price and the widest risk-to-reward ratio, but carries the risk that the zone may not hold and price continues through.

Aggressive Entry — Step-by-Step Execution

1. Identify the demand zone on your chosen timeframe

2. Calculate proximal line (entry) and distal line (SL)

3. Verify zone score ≥ 7/10 and HTF alignment confirmed

4. Place LIMIT BUY order at the proximal line

5. Place STOP LOSS 2-5 pips below the distal line

6. Set TAKE PROFIT at next supply zone or 2R minimum

7. Set maximum open time rule (e.g., cancel after 48 hours if not triggered)

⚠ Cancel the order if a major news event occurs before zone is hit

6.2 Model 2 — Conservative Entry (Confirmation Candle)

The conservative entry waits for price to enter the zone AND produces a confirmation candle pattern (bullish engulfing, pin bar, inside bar breakout) before entering. This reduces the fill rate but significantly increases win rate, as you have visual confirmation that institutions are reacting at the zone.

Conservative Entry — Confirmation Patterns

✓ Bullish Engulfing: Large bullish candle completely engulfs the previous bearish candle — strong signal

✓ Hammer/Pin Bar: Long lower wick (2x+ body), small upper wick, closing near the high — rejection of lower prices

✓ Inside Bar Breakout: Small candle contained within prior candle; enter on break above its high

✓ Morning Star: Three-candle pattern — bearish, small indecision, then strong bullish — very reliable

✓ Bullish Marubozu: Full-bodied bullish candle with no wicks — pure institutional buying pressure

✗ Avoid: Long upper wicks on entry candles — suggests sellers still in control within the zone

6.3 Trade Management Rules

Management Rule

Specification

Break-Even (BE)

Move SL to entry (BE) after 1R profit. Example: risked 20 pips, move BE when +20 pips.

Partial Profit 1

Close 33% of position at 1R. Secures partial gain while letting rest run.

Partial Profit 2

Close another 33% at TP1 (first opposing zone). Runner position continues.

Runner Management

Trail final 33% using LTF S&D zones — trail SL to each new demand zone formed.

Zone Re-test

If price re-tests your entry zone after moving in your favor, it may be re-entering from supply side. Consider closing.

Max Hold Time

If trade hasnt moved in 48-72 hours (swing) or 4-8 hours (day trade) — close at break-even.

News Management

Close or hedge before major news events if trade is open and near a zone.

Scaling In

Only scale into a position if the zone holds and price offers a second entry at a superior price.

7. Risk Management Framework

Risk management is the single most important element of long-term trading success. Even the best S&D strategy will fail without disciplined, consistent risk management. The following framework is built around the principle that protecting capital is priority one — profits are a consequence of systematic risk management.

Figure 8: Position Sizing & Risk/Reward Reference Table

7.1 Position Sizing Formula

Position Size Calculation

Position Size (Lots) = Account Risk $ ÷ (Stop Loss in Pips × Pip Value)

Example (Forex EUR/USD):

  Account: $10,000 | Risk: 1% = $100 | SL: 20 pips | Pip value: $10/pip (standard lot)

  Position Size = $100 ÷ (20 × $10) = $100 ÷ $200 = 0.50 lots

Example (Crypto BTC):

  Account: $5,000 | Risk: 1% = $50 | SL: 1% from entry | Entry: $65,000

  SL distance: $650 | Position Size = $50 ÷ $650 = 0.077 BTC

7.2 Risk Rules — The Non-Negotiables

Maximum risk per trade: 1-2% of total account balance

Maximum simultaneous open trades: 3-5 (prevents correlated losses)

Maximum daily loss limit: 3-5% — stop trading for the day if hit

Maximum weekly loss limit: 8% — stop trading for the week if hit

Minimum Risk-to-Reward ratio: 1:2 (only take trades with at least 2R potential)

Never move SL against your position (never widen the stop loss)

Never add to a losing position (no averaging down)

Correlated pairs count as one trade (EUR/USD long + GBP/USD long = one directional bet)

7.3 Risk/Reward Targets by Timeframe

Timeframe

Min RR

Target RR

Max SL Width

Monthly/Weekly

1:3

1:5+

500-2000 pips

Daily

1:2.5

1:4+

100-500 pips

4-Hour

1:2

1:3

30-150 pips

1-Hour

1:2

1:3

15-60 pips

15-Minute

1:1.5

1:2.5

8-25 pips

5-Minute

1:1.5

1:2

5-15 pips

1-Minute

1:1.5

1:2

3-10 pips

8. Advanced Concepts & Confluences

Once the foundational S&D framework is mastered, several advanced concepts can be layered onto the strategy to dramatically increase the precision and win rate of individual trade setups.

8.1 Liquidity Grabs (Stop Hunts)

Before price reverses at a major S&D zone, institutions frequently engineer a "liquidity grab" — a brief spike beyond the zone to collect the stop losses of retail traders positioned there. Recognizing a liquidity grab in real time is one of the highest-conviction entry signals available.

Liquidity Grab Entry — Sequence

1. Price approaches a demand zone (proximal line visible to most traders)

2. Price spikes BELOW the proximal line, often reaching the distal line or beyond

3. Retail stop losses below the zone are collected (institutions accumulate at better prices)

4. Price IMMEDIATELY reverses and closes back above the proximal line

5. Enter on the close of the reversal candle — this is the highest conviction entry

6. Stop Loss: Just below the low of the wick (liquidity grab wick)

→ This setup has the tightest SL and widest RR of any S&D entry model

8.2 Zone Confluence Factors

Confluence Factor

How It Strengthens the Zone

HTF Zone Alignment

When a 1H zone sits inside a Daily zone — multiple timeframes confirm institutional interest at that level

Round Numbers

Price levels ending in 000 or 00 (e.g. 1.2000, 50,000) — institutions cluster orders at psychological levels

Fibonacci Levels

61.8%, 50%, 38.2% retracement aligning with S&D zone — algorithmic system confluence

Moving Averages

200 EMA or 50 EMA intersecting with a zone — institutional trend-following systems align here

VWAP / POC

Volume-weighted average price or Volume Profile Point of Control at zone level — volume-based confluence

Previous Structure

Prior swing high/low aligning with a zone — multi-methodology confirmation

Market Session Open

Zone aligning with London or NY session open price — institutions begin the session at this level

Fair Value Gap (FVG)

An unmitigated gap in price action within or adjacent to the S&D zone — powerful magnetic level

8.3 Zone Invalidation Rules

A zone is not valid forever. The following events invalidate a zone and require it to be removed from your active zone list:

CANDLE BODY CLOSE through the distal line — invalidated immediately. Wick penetrations alone do not invalidate.

Price consolidates WITHIN the zone for more than 4-6 candles (on your trading TF) — zone is being absorbed.

A major news event causes price to gap completely through the zone with no reaction.

A new higher-quality zone forms in the same price area — supersedes the old zone.

Zone was formed more than 3 months ago (Daily/HTF) without being tested — institutional orders likely cancelled.

8.4 Order Blocks (ICT Concept)

An Order Block is the specific candle — usually the last bearish candle before a rally, or the last bullish candle before a drop — where institutions placed the decisive batch of orders. While similar to S&D zones, Order Blocks pinpoint the exact candle rather than a zone range. Trading the Order Block (OB) high/low offers even tighter entry and stop loss placements, particularly on lower timeframes.

8.5 Breaker Blocks

A Breaker Block occurs when a supply or demand zone fails (is broken through) and then becomes the opposite type of zone. A failed demand zone becomes supply on a retest; a failed supply zone becomes demand. Breaker Blocks often produce violent, fast reactions because they combine zone expectations with trader frustration from the false breakout.

9. Trading Psychology & Discipline

The technical edge provided by Supply and Demand analysis is only as valuable as the discipline of the trader executing it. The psychological framework is equally important to the technical framework. Most retail traders fail not because of a poor strategy, but because they abandon their strategy during periods of normal drawdown.

9.1 Core Psychological Principles

Process over outcome: Judge your trades on execution quality, not individual results

Probabilistic thinking: A 65% win rate means 35 losses per 100 trades — this is expected, not failure

Patience as edge: The strategy requires waiting for A+ setups — forcing trades destroys the edge

Detachment from individual trades: Each trade is just one data point in a 100-trade sample

Journaling: Record every trade with entry rationale, zone screenshot, and outcome for continuous improvement

Drawdown protocol: Pre-define maximum drawdown thresholds before reducing size or stopping

9.2 Common Psychological Mistakes

Mistake

Correction & Protocol

Revenge trading

After a loss, mandatory 30-minute break. Never enter a new trade immediately after a stop-out.

Moving the stop loss

Stop loss is non-negotiable once set. Write the SL in your trading journal before entry to commit.

Skipping the plan

If there is no plan (zone ID, entry, SL, TP all pre-defined), there is no trade. No plan = no execute.

Over-trading

Set a maximum daily trade count (e.g., 3 trades). Quality over quantity in S&D trading.

FOMO entry

If you missed the zone, the trade is done. Never chase. Mark the zone for future reference.

Ignoring HTF context

Always ask: is HTF aligned? If not, do not execute regardless of how good LTF looks.

9.3 Performance Tracking Metrics

Metric

Formula

Target

Frequency

Win Rate

Wins ÷ Total Trades × 100

50-65%

Weekly

Profit Factor

Gross Profit ÷ Gross Loss

> 1.5

Monthly

Average RR

Average Win ÷ Average Loss

> 2.0

Monthly

Max Drawdown

Peak-to-trough equity decline

< 15%

Ongoing

Expectancy

(WR × Avg Win) - (LR × Avg Loss)

Positive

Monthly

Setup Quality

A+ setups ÷ Total setups taken

> 70% A+

Weekly

10. Backtesting, Automation & System Development

To move from a discretionary strategy to a systematic, algorithmic one, the S&D framework must be codified into rules that can be tested historically and executed automatically. This section provides the blueprint for algorithmic implementation.

10.1 Backtesting Methodology

Backtesting Protocol for S&D Strategy

Step 1: Select instrument and timeframe for backtesting (start with Daily chart)

Step 2: Define exact zone detection rules (base size, departure speed, ATR multiples)

Step 3: Walk forward through 3-5 years of price data manually or programmatically

Step 4: Mark every qualifying zone that meets the score threshold (≥7/10)

Step 5: Record every instance where price returned to each zone

Step 6: Apply entry model (aggressive or conservative) and record outcome

Step 7: Compile statistics: win rate, RR achieved, max adverse excursion, max favorable excursion

Step 8: Segment results by: zone type, session, market condition, score bucket

Step 9: Iterate — optimize parameters based on segment performance data

Step 10: Forward test (paper trade) for 3+ months before live deployment

10.2 Algorithmic Implementation Inputs & Outputs Summary

Module

Inputs

Processing

Outputs

Zone Scanner

OHLCV data, ATR(14), lookback period

Base/departure detection, pattern classification

Zone list [price, type, score, TF]

Zone Filter

Zone list, HTF trend, session time

Score threshold, HTF alignment check

Qualified zones list

Entry Engine

Current price, qualified zones, order book

Proximity check, trigger condition monitor

Entry signal [direction, price, size]

Risk Calculator

Account balance, zone width, ATR

Position sizing formula application

Lot size, SL price, TP price

Trade Manager

Open position, live price, zones

BE rule, partial exit, trailing logic

Order modifications, close signals

Performance Logger

Trade history, account equity

Statistical calculations

Metrics dashboard, journal entries

10.3 Recommended Technology Stack

Tool / Platform

Use Case

TradingView (Pine Script)

Zone visualization, backtesting, alerts — best for visual development

MetaTrader 4/5 (MQL4/5)

Automated EA development for Forex — direct broker integration

Python (pandas, backtrader)

Full statistical backtesting, machine learning integration, data analysis

cTrader (cAlgo)

Algo trading for Forex/CFDs — C# based, professional broker integration

Interactive Brokers API

Stocks and options automation — institutional grade execution

CCXT (Python)

Cryptocurrency exchange connectivity — supports 100+ exchanges

10.4 Zone Detection Code Specification (Pseudocode)

Core Zone Detection Algorithm — Pseudocode

FUNCTION detect_zones(ohlcv_data, atr_period=14, base_max_body_ratio=0.4, departure_min_atr=2.0):

   atr = calculate_ATR(ohlcv_data, atr_period)

   zones = []

   FOR i in range(3, len(ohlcv_data) - 3):

      candle = ohlcv_data[i]

      body_size = abs(candle.close - candle.open)

      IF body_size < atr[i] * base_max_body_ratio:  // It is a base candle

         prev_move = classify_move(ohlcv_data[i-3:i])  // Rally or Drop

         next_move = classify_move(ohlcv_data[i:i+3])  // Rally or Drop

         departure_size = calculate_move_size(ohlcv_data[i:i+3])

         IF departure_size > atr[i] * departure_min_atr:  // Strong departure

            zone_type = classify_zone(prev_move, next_move)  // RBD/DBR/RBR/DBD

            score = calculate_zone_score(candle, ohlcv_data, i)

            IF score >= 7:

               zones.append({type: zone_type, proximal: ..., distal: ..., score: score})

   RETURN zones

11. Quick Reference — Trading Checklists

11.1 Pre-Trade Checklist (Every Trade)

HTF trend identified and direction confirmed (Daily/Weekly)

Zone type correctly classified (RBD/DBR/RBR/DBD)

Zone score calculated and ≥ 7/10

Zone is FRESH (first touch or maximum second touch)

Clear space between entry zone and next opposing zone (room to run)

Risk-to-Reward ratio ≥ 1:2 confirmed

Position size calculated (max 1-2% account risk)

Stop loss placed correctly (beyond distal line)

Take profit levels identified (at opposing zones)

No major news events in next 2-4 hours that could invalidate zone

11.2 Zone ID Cheat Sheet

Zone Type

Formation

Trade Direction

HTF Bias Needed

RBD (Supply)

Rally → Base → Drop

SHORT (Sell)

Bearish or Neutral

DBR (Demand)

Drop → Base → Rally

LONG (Buy)

Bullish or Neutral

RBR (Demand)

Rally → Base → Rally

LONG (Buy)

Bullish

DBD (Supply)

Drop → Base → Drop

SHORT (Sell)

Bearish

Breaker (Demand)

Failed Supply → Demand

LONG (Buy)

Bullish reversal

Breaker (Supply)

Failed Demand → Supply

SHORT (Sell)

Bearish reversal

11.3 Session Timing Reference

Session

GMT Time

EST Time

Best For

Asian

00:00 - 08:00

19:00 - 03:00

JPY pairs; zone formation (low vol)

London

08:00 - 16:00

03:00 - 11:00

EUR/GBP/CHF; strongest zone reactions

NY Open

13:00 - 17:00

08:00 - 12:00

USD pairs, stocks, indices; highest volume

NY Afternoon

17:00 - 21:00

12:00 - 16:00

Continuation trades; stock market close

Overlap

13:00 - 16:00

08:00 - 11:00

London/NY overlap = peak liquidity

11.4 Common Mistakes Reference

Mistake

Rule to Follow

Trading a tested zone (2nd+ touch)

Stick to fresh zones only. Score drops 3 points on each test.

Wide base = big zone = weaker signal

Base of 1-3 candles = A+ grade. 7+ candles = skip.

Entering mid-zone instead of proximal

Always enter at the proximal line. Mid-zone = worse RR, unclear SL.

Trading against HTF trend

Counter-trend S&D trades exist but need 3+ confluences. Default = with trend.

Ignoring spread on small timeframes

On 1M/5M scalps, spread can be 20-50% of your entire SL. Always account for it.

No zone invalidation plan

Define before entry: "If price closes through X level, zone is invalid, SL is hit."

11.5 Key Terms Glossary

Term

Definition

Supply Zone

Area where price previously dropped sharply away from — institutions sold here

Demand Zone

Area where price previously rallied sharply away from — institutions bought here

Proximal Line

The closest edge of the zone to current price — entry reference line

Distal Line

The far edge of the zone — stop loss reference line

Mitigation

When price returns to and reacts at a zone — partially filling remaining orders

Fresh Zone

A zone that has not been touched/tested since it was formed

Liquidity Grab

A brief spike beyond a zone to collect stop losses before reversing

Order Block

The specific candle (last opposing candle) where institutional orders were placed

Breaker Block

A failed zone that flips polarity and becomes the opposite type of zone

HTF

Higher Timeframe — any timeframe above your trading timeframe

LTF

Lower Timeframe — used for entry confirmation after HTF zone is identified

RR / R:R

Risk-to-Reward ratio — profit potential divided by maximum risk

ATR

Average True Range — volatility measure used for dynamic SL sizing

RBD

Rally-Base-Drop — supply zone formation pattern

DBR

Drop-Base-Rally — demand zone formation pattern